Linear Meld~(LM) is a linear logic programming language aimed for the parallel
implementation of graph-based algorithms~\cite{cruz-iclp14}.  LM is a high-level
declarative language that offers a concise and expressive framework to define
graph based algorithms that are provably correct.  LM has been applied to a wide
range of problems and machine learning algorithms, including: belief
propagation~\cite{Gonzalez+al:aistats09paraml}, belief propagation with residual
splash~\cite{Gonzalez+al:aistats09paraml}, PageRank, graph coloring, N-Queens,
shortest path, diameter estimation, map reduce, quick-sort, neural network
training, minimax, and many others.

Like Datalog, LM is a \emph{forward-chaining} logic programming language since
computation is driven by a set of inference rules that are used to update a
database of logical facts.  In Datalog, programs are monotonic and therefore the
database grows in size as more facts are inferred from the logical rules. In LM,
logical facts are linear and thus can be retracted when a rule is inferred. The
use of linear facts greatly increases the power of the language but also
increases the complexity of the implementation since database facts are
retracted often.

In previous work~\cite{cruz-ppdp14}, we have described the implementation of the
LM virtual machine, including its data structures and how programs are
paralellized. In this paper, we describe our compilation strategy
and how we have refitted the runtime system to allow stand-alone compilation of
programs by transforming logical rules into C++ code.

Our goal was to reduce the overhead of executing interpreted byte code and
better understand the effectiveness and limitations of the compilation scheme.
We present an algorithm that compiles logical rules, including comprehensions
and aggregates, into efficient iterator-based C++ code.  The compiler supports
rule priorities, allowing the programmer to order rules based on their priority
of inference. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first available
compilation strategy for a linear logic language that supports these 3 features
combined. The contributions of this paper are then three-fold: (1) a novel
algorithm to compile prioritized linear logic rules with aggregates and
comprehensions; (2) the interplay between the database layout and compiled code;
and (3) comparison and analysis of our compilation with hand-written C programs
and interpreted code.  Experimental results show that our compiled programs are
only 2 to 7 times slower than hand-written C programs.

The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. First, we briefly introduce
the LM language. Next, we present an overview of the runtime support available
to compiled rules and we discuss our contributions which include the algorithm
for compiling rules into efficient iterator-based C++ code, and related work. We
then present experimental results comparing our compiled programs with the old
implementation and with hand-written C programs.  The paper finishes with some
conclusions.
